RC2 draft 🎈 (#22)
open-gitops/documents: GLOSSARY.md

# GitOps Glossary

This glossary accompanies the [GitOps Principles](./PRINCIPLES.md), and other supporting documents in this repository.

- ## Continuous

    "Continuous" is intended to match the industry standard term: [reconciliation](#reconciliation) continues to happen, not that it must be instantaneous.

- ## Declarative Description

>     A configuration that describes the desired operating state of a system without specifying procedures for how that state will be acheived. This separates configuration (the desired state) from the implementation (commands, API calls, scripts etc.) used to achieve that state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A configuration that describes the desired operating state of a system without specifying procedures for how that state will be achieved. This separates configuration (the desired state) from the implementation (commands, API calls, scripts etc.) used to achieve that state.
```

Reviewer 2: I think we should add Co-authored-by trailers to the commit from #23, since it was recommended here as well. We can still rewrite commits in this PR branch before anything gets committed to `main`.

@todaywasawesome do you want me to take care of that?

Author: @scottrigby yes please

Reviewer 2: Done in 2c69564470c4e1bf95ebb2eab1bdb4f25bb37ac8 🙌

- ## Desired State

>     The aggregate of all configuration data needed to start, bootstrap, recreate, run, and recover a system. This does not include data stored within a system, eg. database contents.

Reviewer: Are you sure you want to exclude data stored within the system -- on the face of it, this would rule out self-describing systems like Kubernetes, in which the data describing the system is also data within the system (or require you to have a tiered classification, such that e.g., custom resources are data on one level, but configuration on another level and thus OK for GitOps on that level ...)

Author: The intention is here is basically not to say that every change to a database has to go through git, or that a 50 GB database somehow needs to be stored in git. If we have CRDs or configmaps that are needed to start, bootstrap, recreate, and recover a system then they would need to be stored along with the rest of the config. 

Does that make sense or do you think it needs additional clarification?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    The aggregate of all configuration data needed to start, bootstrap, recreate, run, and recover a system. Optionally, this can include application data stored within applications in a system, eg. application database contents.
```
@squaremo @todaywasawesome WDYT?
• I added `application` modifier to classify application data differently from system data.
• [Application software](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Application_software) is typically different from [system software](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/System_software).
• Then, I added `Optionally,` to give people the autonomy to include application data.
• For example, [Liquibase](https://www.liquibase.org/) can be used to include 0.1 GB application database schema via GitOps, while the remaining 49.9 GB of data are excluded from GitOps.
• The right shade of gray is situational.

Reviewer: Yeah, I get the intention, and it's tricky to nail it down without tying yourself in logical knots. Probably I'm being pedantic.

On another point though:

> The aggregate of all configuration data needed to start, bootstrap, recreate, run, and recover a system.

I don't think you want to specify "all configuration data needed to [...] run [...] a system". I think the intention there is to account for the desired state being a target while the system is running. But taken at face value, it draws in the bookkeeping the system does: the desired state is usually abstract, while the state needed to _run_ the system must have all the details. For example, you might have a Kubernetes Deployment in your declarations, but the running system needs all the pods to be defined. There is a large belt of grey area, extending into databases (as in my comment above) but also extending the other direction into configuration.

The approach of relating the description to the system's requirements is the right one, I think. Perhaps something like

> An  abstract description of the system that is sufficient to create and recover the running system with automation, reliably.

"Reliably" is doing a lot of work there -- what I want to get across is that there's a tolerance for details changing.

I don't mention bootstrapping because I consider that part of the tooling, rather than the system. I don't mention running, because I think a description that's adequate for recovering the system must also be adequate for keeping it running. (But that point might be worth spelling out)

Reviewer 2: @lloydchang I think I understand what you mean.

- Starting off with "generally this does not include" was ambiguous, it sounds like you took it to mean gitops does not include this at all. Changing that to "This configuration data generally does not include" to make that more clear. Now does not exclude these less common use cases you mention. 
- Also the sentence continued with "but may include credentials…". The "but may" here seems to imply the application data "may not" be included. Changing that to "though often does include".
- Per @todaywasawesome changing "and configuration for recovery tools that should be running on the system" to "or configuration for data recovery tools running on that system", since these are two of the most common, but still optional ways of doing stateful applications with GitOps safely.

```diff
## Desired State

- This generally does not include persistent application data, eg. database contents, but may include credentials for accessing that data, and configuration for recovery tools that should be running on the system.
+ This configuration data generally does not include persistent application data, eg. database contents, though often does include credentials for accessing that data, or configuration for data recovery tools running on that system.

```

Reviewer 2: @squaremo agreed on both points. Incorporating a version that we think satisfies all these points. 

Everyone, please lmk if you still feel it should change after this ebdc34bc2d5448770260325e9d243b85dbe27641 🙏 😸

>     The aggregate of all configiuration data needed to start, bootstrap, recreate, run, and recover a system. This does not include data stored within a system, eg. database contents.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    The aggregate of all configuration data needed to start, bootstrap, recreate, run, and recover a system. This does not include data stored within a system, eg. database contents.
```

Author: Merged on #23

Reviewer 2: I think we should add Co-authored-by trailers to the commit from #23, since it was recommended here as well. We can still rewrite commits in this PR branch before anything gets committed to `main`.

@todaywasawesome do you want me to take care of that?

Reviewer 2: Done in 2c69564470c4e1bf95ebb2eab1bdb4f25bb37ac8 🙌 Thanks @ckavili

- ## Drift

>     When a system's actual state changes for any reason other than its [desired state](#desired-state)declarations having changed. When this occurs, the system has drifted from its desired state.

Author: > For example, by the definition given, if I declare I want 10 replicas, there are 8 replicas, and the system starts another, that's drift.

I disagree with this one. The definition clearly states that drift only occurs when changes to the actual system state are made _that aren't based on the desired state changing_. Changes to achieve the desired state are by definition not drift.

>     When a system's actual state changes for any reason other than its [desired state](#desired-state)declarations having changed. When this occurs, the system has drifted from its desired state.

Reviewer: > Changes to achieve the desired state are by definition not drift.

The change in my example is not a change to the desired state, it is a change to the running state.

>     When a system's actual state changes for any reason other than its [desired state](#desired-state)declarations having changed. When this occurs, the system has drifted from its desired state.

Reviewer: That quibbling is a bit beside the point though, which I will try to restate: I don't think it's useful to talk about drift, because all you care about is whether you need to take action to move the running state towards the desired state. It doesn't matter what changed.

>     When a system's actual state changes for any reason other than its [desired state](#desired-state)declarations having changed. When this occurs, the system has drifted from its desired state.

Reviewer 3: The current definition "... `any reason`... `drifted from its desired state`" appear to exclude the following scenario:

Convergence from right (actual state) to left (desired state) discussed in https://github.com/open-gitops/documents/pull/14#discussion_r676288778

From @lloydchang to @scottrigby:
> desired state can be reconciled; please see https://youtu.be/fZEFWh4xBEw?t=1135 🙂
>
> "Convergence doesn't just mean left to right. It might in fact mean right to left. It might mean there is some kind of automation that's happening in the runtime system that is doing legitimate things and I'll give you a concrete example of later in the talk, that is doing legitimate things that then need to be reflected back into the git repository. Because not only is the git repository; not only is git the interface for operations, it now becomes the source of truth; it is the desired state, so if we're constantly bringing these things into alignment; if something happens in the runtime environment that should be part of the desired state, we need to ensure that is captured as well."

From @scottrigby to @lloydchang:
> @lloydchang I have been a bit hung up on terminology of convergence vs reconciliation. However after talking with @cdavisafc about this more I agree with you. There is more to be said about the details (like write back agents following rules specified in the intentional declarations, not mixing intentional and automated write back info etc), but that can be addressed in a glossary item, or in best practices or another supporting doc

>     When a system's actual state changes for any reason other than its [desired state](#desired-state)declarations having changed. When this occurs, the system has drifted from its desired state.

Reviewer 2: @lloydchang yes it's true in that video and elsewhere @cdavisafc is interested in describing a wider idea of "convergence". However I am very sure she did _not_ mean that changes in actual state should take precedence as the source of truth over the versioned desired state declarations.

The scenario she's describing here is when you install specific software running on the system to help update your desired state declarations for you _based on explicit rules set in the desired state_, e.g., pinning versions based on a semver range, or calculating dates based on a pre-defined range. These are interesting and convenient tools for people who manage desired state but want to specify rules for things without always having to update the results of those rules manually.

It's important to note that precaution should be taken whenever allowing _any_ software to automatically write back to your source of truth. Justin Cormack has a really good description of this in his GitOpsDays presentation: [GitOps In The Next Five Years](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GNKb0weP7eU&ab_channel=Weaveworks%2CInc.). He suggests some implementation details like ensuring those changes are written to a separate branch in Git, etc. But I think the overall point stands for any setup that uses software to write back to where you store your desired state.

I was thinking we may want to discuss this more and expand on these points in a forthcoming best practices doc, which the group has been planning to work on after the principles and glossary. However we decided not to include more detailed notes like that in the glossary. WDYT?

>     When a system's actual state changes for any reason other than its [desired state](#desired-state)declarations having changed. When this occurs, the system has drifted from its desired state.

Reviewer 2: @squaremo we currently refer to "drifting" in the Reconciliation glossary item. Are you thinking we should use a different term than "drift", clarify the difference between drift and the process of moving towards a desired state, or something else?

> For each change in the actual state, who's to say whether it's drift (which suggests moving away from the desired state), or progress

FWIW this is something that I believe is addressed by the (currently omitted) closed loop principle. I'd love your feedback on the notes in the #21 PR description under "Items left out of this PR" > "Existing principle 5": operating in a closed loop. I think this would answer the "who's to say" question. Software agents on whatever kind of system that take feedback into account must be intelligent enough to determine what to do. In k8s that may mean continuing to try to apply the manifests, or even there it may mean attempting to apply N times before pausing and alerting. Right?

>     When a system's actual state changes for any reason other than its [desired state](#desired-state)declarations having changed. When this occurs, the system has drifted from its desired state.

Reviewer: On making changes back to git: I would think of this as outside GitOps. In some practical systems you might want to have automation that e.g., recognises when there need to be more replicas, and makes that the new recovery point by committing a change to git. There's no need to explicitly include it or to rule it out here.

>     When a system's actual state changes for any reason other than its [desired state](#desired-state)declarations having changed. When this occurs, the system has drifted from its desired state.

Reviewer 3: @scottrigby Convergence _(which happens automatically)_ seems too detailed for `BEST-PRACTICES.md`

>     When a system's actual state changes for any reason other than its [desired state](#desired-state)declarations having changed. When this occurs, the system has drifted from its desired state.

Reviewer 2: @squaremo I think your points are mostly covered now by 988c758. WDYT? The only difference here is we believe it's important to note that drift occurs everywhere, but GitOps has a unique way of dealing with it. Perhaps we can come up with better terminology, but so far it's been a useful analogy.

@lloydchang let's follow up on where best to write details about automatically writing back to git, and the caution that should be taken in doing so. We already have plans to add details around the specific caution that should be taken when setting up Git, storage buckets, etc, in order to follow GitOps principles beyond just adopting those tools.

- ## Reconciliation

    The process of ensuring the actual state of a system matches its [desired state](#desired-state) declarations.

>     Contrary to "CIops", any divergence between the two will trigger reconciliation, regardless of where changes occured.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Contrary to "CI Ops", any divergence between the two will trigger reconciliation, regardless of where changes occurred.
```
1. Related, https://github.com/open-gitops/documents/pull/8
• "CIOps" -> "CI Ops"
2. Fix typo:
• occured -> occurred

Reviewer 2: Hi @lloydchang thanks!

Everyone:
- We could use some more group feedback about @lloydchang 's point 1 above. Here is the existing discussion on that for (slightly) more context: https://github.com/open-gitops/documents/pull/8

@lloydchang:
- Point 2, yes! thanks for the typo fix. Can you make a separate code suggestion just for the typo, since that does not need further discussion?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    Contrary to "CIops", any divergence between the two will trigger reconciliation, regardless of where changes occurred.
```
2. Fix typo _(only)_:
• occured -> occurred
_(as requested by @scottrigby)_

Reviewer 3: A. @todaywasawesome suggested "traditional CI/CD" immediately above.
B. @scottrigby hinted at "Operations driven by Continuous Integration" in https://github.com/open-gitops/documents/pull/8#pullrequestreview-687559861
Either suggestion or hint works for me because my primary objective of replacing "`CIOps`" is to prevent anyone else from accidentally searching for "`Clops`" like I did.

Author: Ok, so we changed the language to CI/CD and made it a bit more clear. I don't know that it's 100% for everyone but lets resolve it for now as it's not a blocker for v1.

>     Contrary to "CIops", any divergence between the two will trigger reconciliation, regardless of where changes occurred.

Reviewer: Practical systems needn't use triggers in this way -- it's an implementation detail. It is enough to say that reconciliation works continually to make progress towards the desired state.

Reviewer 2: @squaremo this note is here to make clear that doing CD tasks from CI systems in itself is not GitOps, because it is event-based not continuous. I think you're right saying reconciliation is continuous implies that, but since Continuous Integration is so widely known about compared to GitOps CD, I think the word "continuous" in itself needs some further clarification like this to drive home the distinction. Do you think that is very clear without this sentence? Or do you think this sentence should be adjusted to make that point in a different way?

Reviewer: > this note is here to make clear that doing CD tasks from CI systems in itself is not GitOps, because it is event-based only, not continuous.

I like @lloydchang 's suggested phrasing. I would elaborate on it a little, by saying that the reasons typical uses of CI fall short of gitops are:

 - action is only taken when a change is made to the source, so it's not continually trying to make progress;
 - events can be processed out of order; e.g., a pipeline fails, then is run again later and succeeds

Reviewer 5: I am not sure progress is the right word here - It will most commonly be associated with progressive delivery which is outside the scope of GitOps either via each progression being a new declaration or through the abstraction of the delivery to another controller - A gitops controller shouldn't be progressively incrementing for example replicas and leaving "attempted" state in between desired and actual.

Author: Closing this conversation as it's now out of date with the PR.

Reviewer 2: Reopening conversation so that if desired this can be moved to an issue for feedback between RC 2 and planned v1.0.0. Good points are made here.

This glossary accompanies the [GitOps Principles](./PRINCIPLES.md), and other supporting documents in this repository.

- ## Continuous

    "Continuous" is intended to match the industry standard term: [reconciliation](#reconciliation) continues to happen, not that it must be instantaneous.

- ## Declarative Description

    A configuration that describes the desired operating state of a system without specifying procedures for how that state will be achieved. This separates configuration (the desired state) from the implementation (commands, API calls, scripts etc.) used to achieve that state.

- ## Desired State

    The aggregate of all configuration data needed to start, bootstrap, recreate, run, and recover a system. This does not include data stored within a system, eg. database contents.

- ## Drift

>     When a system's actual state changes for any reason other than its [desired state](#desired-state)declarations having changed. When this occurs, the system has drifted from its desired state.

Reviewer 6: Unrelated to discussion of inclusion of `Drift` - minor typo:
``` suggestion
    When a system's actual state changes for any reason other than its [desired state](#desired-state) declarations having changed. When this occurs, the system has drifted from its desired state.
```

- ## Reconciliation

>     The process of ensuring the actual state of a system matches its [desired state](#desired-state) declarations.

Reviewer 6: (nit?): The phrase `desired state declarations` is used in a couple places in this PR. For some reason it doesn't sit right with me - in particular the word `declarations`. I guess I feel that this is redundant (a form of tautology) in that `desired state` is already defined in this document as:

> The aggregate of all configuration data

Given the plural nature of the word `declarations` does that now mean that we are referring to a collection of `aggregates`?

Reviewer 3: @onematchfox I see your point because `"desired state"` is already defined as a phrase — To a casual reader _skimming_, another way to interpret it is `desired "state declarations"`, which gives it a different meaning.  Perhaps the actual intent is `declared "desired state"`?

Reviewer 6: :thinking: Yeah, I think you've got the basis of the point I'm trying to get across. Although, I would even take it a step further and aim to drop the word "declarative/declared" entirely. In this particular sentence I think it would (should?) be sufficient with saying:

> The process of ensuring that the actual state of a system matches **the** [desired state](#desired-state).

But to achieve this it would probably mean adjusting the definition of "desired state" to make the _declarative_ nature more apparent? In some ways the concept is already there but does require some reading _between the lines_: 

> Declarative Description
> A **configuration** that describes the desired operating state of a system ...
> 
> Desired State
> The aggregate of all **configuration** data

Reviewer 3: @onematchfox LGTM

Reviewer 3: @onematchfox LGTM; would you kindly create an in-line `suggestion` via the `±` icon here in GitHub?  Thank you!

Author: Totally agree, merging.

Author: @lloydchang we're doing a commit with co-author now.

Author: Merged.

This glossary accompanies the [GitOps Principles](./PRINCIPLES.md), and other supporting documents in this repository.

- ## Continuous

    "Continuous" is intended to match the industry standard term: [reconciliation](#reconciliation) continues to happen, not that it must be instantaneous.

- ## Declarative Description

    A configuration that describes the desired operating state of a system without specifying procedures for how that state will be achieved. This separates configuration (the desired state) from the implementation (commands, API calls, scripts etc.) used to achieve that state.

- ## Desired State

    The aggregate of all configuration data needed to start, bootstrap, recreate, run, and recover a system. This does not include data stored within a system, eg. database contents.

> - ## Drift
> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
@scottrigby @todaywasawesome I agree with @squaremo re: removing Drift from `GLOSSARY.md`

Reviewer 2: OK we addressed this in the other thread. PTAL at 988c758 and continue to give feedback if you think that doesn't address those concerns 🙏

    When a system's actual state changes for any reason other than its [desired state](#desired-state)declarations having changed. When this occurs, the system has drifted from its desired state.

- ## Reconciliation

    The process of ensuring the actual state of a system matches its [desired state](#desired-state) declarations.

>     Contrary to "CIops", any divergence between the two will trigger reconciliation, regardless of where changes occured.
>     Divergence could be due to the actual state unintentionally [drifting](#drift) from the desired state declarations, or a new desired state declaration version having been changed intentionally.

Author: ```suggestion
    Contrary to "CIops", any divergence between the two will trigger reconciliation, regardless of where changes occurred.
    Divergence could be due to the actual state unintentionally [drifting](#drift) from the desired state declarations, or a new desired state declaration version having been changed intentionally.
```

>     Divergence could be due to the actual state unintentionally [drifting](#drift) from the desired state declarations, or a new desired state declaration version having been changed intentionally.

Author: ```suggestion
```

I suggest removing these lines to keep the definition simple. Thoughts?

Reviewer 7: Line 25 without the first part of the sentence and keep something like `Any drift between the two will trigger reconciliation, regardless of where changes occurred.` might be more precise as a definition or description using and undefined term (see note). Now, this sentence might be more important under `Drift`

I agree line 26 does not fit here. It might be more relevant under the `Drift` term as well

Note: when I say `undefined term` is because  there does not seems to be a group with an open collaboration defining CIops and at this moment, the terms seems to open to interpretations by different organizations (I could be wrong). Alternative, we could include a CIops definition in the glossary.

Author: @williamcaban Checkout the latest commit which hopefully will resolve this. In the meantime I'm going to close this conversation.
